[nextra] Blockchain execution (#615)
aptos-labs/developer-docs: apps/nextra/pages/en/network/blockchain/execution.mdx

ensuring consistency and security across the network.

Efficient execution, particularly parallel execution, is key to scaling blockchain performance and throughput.

## Why Parallel Execution?

![](https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:4800/format:webp/0*qG0KRe1KzsP8Odth)

Smart contract execution is a major throughput bottleneck for blockchains. 
After proposing blocks and agreeing on their order, validators have to execute the 
transactions in the ordered blocks. Crucially, validators must arrive at the same final state, 
which must correspond to some sequential execution of the transactions. 
Due to the lack of a foundational solution, current blockchains either execute 
sequentially or require an embarrassingly parallel workload (i.e. no inner conflicts) 
for improved performance. Sequential execution does not scale well, and assuming that 
all transactions are commutative is unrealistic when considering a broad range of smart contracts. 

In fact, transactions in a blockchain can have a significant number of access conflicts due to 
potential performance attacks, accessing popular contracts 
(e.g. due to economic opportunities such as auctions and arbitrage).

## Block-STM

> We designed and implemented a highly efficient, multi-threaded, in-memory parallel 
> execution engine. It leverages the preset order of transactions and combines 
> Software Transactional Memory techniques with a novel collaborative schedule.
> 
> Block-STM is the state-of-the-art dynamic parallelism execution engine developed by the Aptos Labs team.
> 
> Dynamic parallelism allows developers to flexibly write applications without 
> facing design constraints of statically declaring write sets of transactions.
> 

Reviewer: There's a lot of jargon thrown around, it reads very much like the papers.  This is hopefully a simplified description

```suggestion
We took a different approach.  Instead of forcing the burden on the developer to specify the conflicts between transactions, we wanted the execution engine to automatically handle them.  We created Block-STM, a multi-threaded parallel execution engine, that can execute over 160k transactions per second.  Block-STM leverages the preset order of transactions, using [STM](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software_transactional_memory) techniques used in traditional computing with a novel collaborative schedule.

Dynamic parallelism (also known as optimistic concurrency) will adjust to the smart contracts being run, and detect conflicts.  When there's a conflict it will rerun those transactions sequentially in the predetermined order to ensure that the final state would be the same as if the whole block was run sequentially.  This removes the burden from the developer to specify dependencies, and allows to automatically parallelize all transactions that do not conflict.
```

---
title: "Parallel Execution"
---

# Execution

> In blockchains, execution refers to the process by which validators 

Reviewer 2: Should we just say "In Aptos"?

> run and apply smart contract transactions from ordered blocks to update the blockchain’s state.

Reviewer: Something reads wrong, but I can't put my finger on it.  How about:

```suggestion
Execution is how smart contracts are run as transactions, and how their outputs are applied to the blockchain's state.
```

> It is crucial because validators must agree on the same final state, post-execution,
> ensuring consistency and security across the network.

Reviewer: Agreement is consensus, not necessarily execution.

```suggestion
The output of execution must be deterministic.  The validators must agree on the same outputs in order to come to consensus.
```

Efficient execution, particularly parallel execution, is key to scaling blockchain performance and throughput.

## Why Parallel Execution?

![](https://miro.medium.com/v2/resize:fit:4800/format:webp/0*qG0KRe1KzsP8Odth)

Smart contract execution is a major throughput bottleneck for blockchains. 
After proposing blocks and agreeing on their order, validators have to execute the 

> transactions in the ordered blocks. Crucially, validators must arrive at the same final state, 

Reviewer: Agreeing on order is the order of the transactions not the blocks.

Author: For context, I had a discussion with @sasha8 and @bchocho on how this page should be structured and we decided to use the text originally included in the Block-STM blog, so this is copied verbatim from https://medium.com/aptoslabs/block-stm-how-we-execute-over-160k-transactions-per-second-on-the-aptos-blockchain-3b003657e4ba. 

Will let the author(s) get first-pick on deciding the language here and for the other suggestions here cc @sasha8. If the wording is incorrect, we should maybe consider updating it in the blog as well.

Reviewer 3: it is a nit. I have no strong opinion.

> Smart contract execution is a major throughput bottleneck for blockchains. 
> After proposing blocks and agreeing on their order, validators have to execute the 
> transactions in the ordered blocks. Crucially, validators must arrive at the same final state, 
> which must correspond to some sequential execution of the transactions. 
> Due to the lack of a foundational solution, current blockchains either execute 
> sequentially or require an embarrassingly parallel workload (i.e. no inner conflicts) 
> for improved performance. Sequential execution does not scale well, and assuming that 
> all transactions are commutative is unrealistic when considering a broad range of smart contracts. 

Reviewer: This was mostly a complex rewording of the earlier statements.  Validators, ordering, etc. are very specific to specific blockchains, how about this for a reword, focusing on the story behind, sequential, pessimistic parallelism
```suggestion
Execution is a major throughput bottleneck for blockchains.  In a [BFT](https://aptos.dev/en/network/glossary#byzantine-fault-tolerance-bft) blockchain, validators propose blocks, and execute the transactions within in a specific order.  It is important that the final state is the same across each validator and the final state is the same as the order.

The simplest approach is to execute all transactions in order (sequential).  However, this does not scale well.  Throughput drops because only one transaction can be executed at a time and have varying execution lengths.

The next approach is to require developers to specify the conflicts between transactions.  The VM would then need to execute transactions in parallel for those that do not conflict, also known as pessimistic parallelism.  This brings a higher burden on the developer, and in many cases force transactions that don't actually conflict, to be sequential.  Having a large number of sequential transactions, especially with varying execution times, can cause the latency and throughput of the blockchain to drop drastically.
```

Reviewer 3: We call this static parallelism.

In fact, transactions in a blockchain can have a significant number of access conflicts due to 
potential performance attacks, accessing popular contracts 
(e.g. due to economic opportunities such as auctions and arbitrage).

## Block-STM

We designed and implemented a highly efficient, multi-threaded, in-memory parallel 

> execution engine that can execute over 160k non-trivial Move transactions per 

Reviewer 3: Best to double check with marketing if we still want to claim this number

Author: Sounds good, mmm let me omit for now and we can add it back in later if its OK

second by leveraging the preset order of transactions and combining 
Software Transactional Memory techniques with a novel collaborative schedule.

> Block-STM is the state-of-the-art dynamic parallelism execution engine developed by the Aptos Labs team.

Reviewer 2: Mention other blockchain adoption?
